this is still the norm in Bozeman when
you go to get a building permit you have
to submit your landscaping plans and
almost every one is about grass and pine
trees the story here starts in 1957 when
my dad bought an 80 acre this was a
wheat farm and he developed this as one
of the first subdivisions in Bozeman he
died young and I inherited what was left
of the land I don't believe in
subdivisions anymore
something I'm promoting is called urban
agriculture this would be a better model
than just grass when the ranch was
purchased it came with some of the
earliest water rights the property still
has 1869 water rights on it we're
currently using the water rights to
irrigate a bunch of condos over here and
when I inherited this land it was just
Kentucky bluegrass and I thought that
was a waste of water and so I thought a
garden would be the proper thing to use
water rights for
and nobody complains that it's not sort
of golf territory I mean sometimes HOAs
can be a bit picky it's not all grass so
it's not everybody loves this and
everybody goes by and they say they
really like what we've done here the two
people that had houses down here that
didn't like it
have both moved away so now we don't
have anybody that's upset with what
we're doing and it looks pretty it's
just yeah not typical HOA material so
this was the original garden here when I
inherited this land in the early 2000s
it was just a big Kentucky bluegrass
field that I was mowing and watering
that seemed like a real waste of
precious water and so we tried a number
of different things on growing food this
is this greenhouse here that we're going
into the sunken greenhouse it's dug
three feet down and then the soil was
back filled three feet up so it's
actually six feet underground and of
course what it does is it keeps it
warmer in the winter and cooler in the
summer because you're buried down into
the ground so you're getting the natural
temperature of the in-ground yeah last
winter I think I got to maybe about
thirty five below zero which puts us at
zone 3 zone 4
so that really limits us on what we can
grow this greenhouse rate without any
heat input raises the temperature 20
degrees so we have zone 6 insides and
we're just experimenting with a whole
bunch of different things this is a
honey berry bush here which produces
something like a blueberry
but since blueberries won't grow in our
alkaline soil we have to pick something
else and then this is a pear tree Asian
pear tree and a lot of these are zone 4
to zone 6 and because we keep the wind
off and it's 20 degrees warmer than
outside we can grow stuff that we can't
grow
side this is an apricot tree this is a
nectarine tree here this is another
Asian pear these are American ground
nuts we were looking at something that
would go up our trellises so we did some
research on what could survive in here
and that was one of the things that we
started last year the one in back here
is Kiwi which would not grow outdoors
and we've got two of them we have not
successfully gotten any fruit off of
them yet this is completely experimental
that's correct
these are nectarines here I'd like to
visit this place in winter when it's
very because it's not gonna be as cold
as outside right it's always about 20
degrees warmer you do not heat this so
it still gets cold so if it's 35 below
zero then it's what minus 15 in here but
between raising the temperature 20
degrees and keeping the wind off of it
we can grow a lot of things that we
wouldn't normally be able to grow here
so you can see we've got some fig trees
here is one here here's a this was our
original one it's probably one of our
more successful trees so we're six feet
underground we dug down three and then
buried the walls up the side three feet
so it's a total of six feet underground
going underground stabilizes the
temperature so it keeps it warmer in the
winter and cooler in the summer by doing
that I can move our zone for up to zone
six with no fossil fuel input so without
heating we can just grow more things
it's called Solex and it's a corrugated
plastic and it seemed like a cost to do
this much you know three or four
thousand dollars the greenhouse itself
cost about a hundred thousand dollars
and one of the reasons it was so
expensive is because we had to meet
Bozeman building codes they made us dig
down a lot deeper than we wanted to go
we had to put road mat down because
we're really close to the water table
and we had to build it to residential
living standards which seems a little
ridiculous so yeah it was kind of
expensive I think you could do it for
twenty to thirty thousand dollars for a
1,500 square foot greenhouse also you
wouldn't have to have stucco beds these
are all cinder block and stucco so he
made it look real pretty because this
greenhouse is a showcase to show what
could be done in the Gallatin Valley for
producing food so in it could be
something that you don't need to the
next seventy-two ditional land you can
just build it open site at home
definitely these could be hooked on to
the homes when I inherited this land I
inherited this RV garage my dad was in
our veer and he had a mini Winnie and so
this building here houses Minnie Winnie
I don't do that so after he died we
converted this into our garden kitchen
so this used to be a garage door so I
took that out this used to be a really
high ceiling so we put this floor in and
then the upstairs is a place where
children can play adults can't quite
stand up in it so originally this was
just one big room all the way back and I
put the ceiling
and I and then we do have a bedroom here
so at one point I was gonna live here we
put this wall across and we have a
composting toilet back here and then you
can see the gardener right so actually
you do have the greenhouse attached oh
wow in a sense but no one lives here
permanently the problem with this as a
living space is it doesn't have passive
solar to warm it up so even though we've
got a greenhouse out there none of that
heat or light comes into here so it
actually is kind of cold in here
climbing like yeah a ship's galley
instead of an actual suburban we've had
sleepovers here where the children can
sleep upstairs so I'd built an ER ship
in Texas which I still have and I live
in that in the winters what's the ltte
Bozeman Bozeman is 4,800 feet above sea
level almost a mile but not quite and
this is more permaculture here where
we're integrating different kinds of
plants together to work together
synergistically so what are these
chimneys oh those are the cooling tubes
for the greenhouse so that when the
vents open it actually pulls the air
through those little chimneys down
underground and then it goes in and so
that cools it in the summer and you can
see the vents over here so those are
cooling tubes
you can see that it's open right there
so the hot air is escaping out there and
as the hot air escapes is pulling the
cooler air down those chimneys and then
they go down underground and then they
come out you can see the vents on the
floor down there it's pulling cool cool
air in the air heats up and hits the
ceiling and then just slides along the
ceiling and goes out there and so right
now here it's a hundred and five it's
pretty hot up here well when you go
downstairs it gets really cool so as it
cools down in the evening then they'll
slowly close and then they'll go fully
close in the winter of course we just
leave them closed all the time so we
collect the water off the roof and this
is a 5,000 gallon cistern right here so
the water is stored in here so there's
5,000 gallons in there right right there
and we use that water to water the plant
there's a pump here and then it pumps
the water out these filters here filter
the water going inside and that sink
inside is using rainwater so this is
pretty self-sufficient yeah I was trying
to build a self-sufficient house here
that has solar panels on it and the
watering system so that we could live
here off-grid and it's pretty close to
that
didn't see our faucets here so when I
turn that on that's rain water and you
can hear the pump came on so it's
pumping out of the cistern right these
treat was probably not like cold and
[Music]
it's just kind of a nice there's this
generational thing with your father
doing one thing and you doing another
right I wasn't a different direction for
sure he and I were both electrical
engineers and we were building
computer-controlled control systems in
this greenhouse is actually controlled
by one of those control systems yeah can
you see the little white thing up there
let's get a temperature probe and a
humidity probe in it and there's several
of them around the greenhouse and the
computer reads those every second and
then it can open the vents and there is
a big fan I can turn on too if it needs
to I can look at the temperature and
control this greenhouse and the watering
system of my pumps anywhere in the world
the humidity in here it's on the
internet but the interesting thing is
I've been getting away from high tech to
grow in kind of a low-tech manner this
is a goomy berry and I'd never heard of
it until two years ago and they're just
thriving in here and who do you how are
you learning from her well we're doing
something called permaculture which
stands for permanent agriculture or
actually now just permanent culture
interestingly enough we tried another
berry black berry which you know in
Oregon is just in Washington just
completely invasive there is some black
berry and over here some blackberry and
it does not thrive here so we're gonna
rip it all out I think it probably
doesn't get enough Sun you like goji
berries
so permaculture it's all about observing
nature and trying to mimic nature and
trying to use your energy inputs and
your resources to grow without a lot of
electricity that you have to buy they
taste a little bit weird don't they when
they're fresh this is a mulberry tree
and I mean a lot of people will laugh
they can grow them whole berries
outdoors but we actually have to grow it
indoors you can't find mulberries in the
store because they don't they don't keep
you can't ship them all you can do is
just pretty much eat them off the tree
and so they did produce for how many
people something this big I think I did
a calculation once that if we had a
thousand two thousand square foot
greenhouses we could produce a
substantial amount of our fruit without
having to truck it in but you'd need a
thousand of them for a hundred thousand
people so we would need a completely
different economic model than we
currently have
when New York City hit a million people
in mid 1800s all their food was grown
within seven miles
so the Gallatin Valley now is up to
about a hundred thousand people we have
a much more severe climate than New York
but I would say we could grow a lot of
our food for a hundred thousand people
in the valley if we had these because
Bozeman is cold zone four we need
something really hot to grow peppers so
this is our pepper house and so you can
see we're growing all kinds of different
peppers these are fruit trees here
that's an apple tree that's a cherry
tree and this is a sea buckthorn we're
into permaculture now so we're trying to
have a whole guild of different types of
plant this is sort of a typical annual
garden but in the back here is something
called permaculture an example of
permaculture is that you have different
plants helping each other in a
synergistic way and often they use a
fruit tree as the centerpiece you can
see we're growing parsley and various
other plants underneath like rhubarb as
part of the guild here this tree is
being supported with strawberries
underneath we have a lot of comfrey
that's what this plant is here which has
a big tap root which tends to bring
minerals up from deep in the ground and
we've got mint
we've got elderberry and it's called
planting a guild of plants that support
each other
some will be nitrogen fixers some will
be pollinator plants and that's part of
the experimenting is to see what
combinations work so this permaculture
end of it here I think we started in
2012 so it's fairly old and it's evolved
and you can see we had a nice fruit tree
here and it died so just like in nature
things grow things die and it keeps
changing every year it looks different
in here however the annual garden we try
to plant the same things we have many
pollinators here one of the women in the
garden group does our bees for us the
purpose of the electric fence is to stop
bears and we have had bears come in here
so these are currants here and then
these are gooseberries so we can get one
kind of food and then in other places we
have raspberries and strawberries but
then you go in the sunken greenhouse
right and we can get things like gummy
berries which won't grow out
doors here you can see all the currents
coming here
those look like they're ready to eat
nope they're really sour when all these
homes have a garden attached it could be
extended I think to urban agriculture
where you have a group of farmers that
just farm people's yards you know doing
this kind of thing is too much work for
just a homeowner but if they could
partner with a group of farmers that are
doing urban agriculture and then they
come in and then they farm the person's
yard and then the person that has the
yard wouldn't have to pay for lawn
mowing services and things like that and
then they could get a portion of the
food and then the group doing the urban
agriculture could then sell the rest of
their products to you know the local
coops and things like that what this
plot of ground here has been so
successful at is creating a new
community of people and we've created
what I call a bonded tribe this is a
hoop house here so we're running this as
a communal garden and it's currently
just open to anybody who wants to come
and garden with us and this is rose here
she's one of the garden members and we
assign out work days and it's roses work
day correct right the way it works is
Sundays from 1 to 6 is a general workday
for everybody and then we have a potluck
at 6 which has bonded us into a nice
bonded tribe of people that are working
together to grow food a bonded tribe
being a group of people doing something
to make make a living together in this
case we're growing food together and
doing that bonds people in a way that
say getting together and watching
football on the couch does not bond
people very well
so this is different than a community
garden where you assign different plots
to people and within their plot they
will grow all the vegetables they want
instead this is done communally we
decide what we want to grow and then as
a communal group we weed it plant it
water it harvest it one of the really
nice things has been if people want to
go on vacation then other people just
fill in and then you share the problem
and we share the crop we share the crop
based on how much work people donate by
rows if they only want to donate an hour
a week or less that's fine they just
wouldn't get as much food but the garden
has actually been so abundant that we
actually wind up throwing away a lot of
the food these are grapes and they were
in the greenhouse and they were just
thriving they just covered all of the
trellises in the greenhouse for two
years and then on the third year they
got whiteflies so we moved them all
outside here so that was an experiment
where if you're gonna have grapes in a
greenhouse you would need to spray
pesticides which we don't want to do I
can show you how we make our own
fertilizer doing something called
compost tea so the comfrey plant that I
told you about we cut it up and this is
a plant that has a deep tap root and
brings a lot of minerals up and we put
it in water and we have an aerator we
also pour some of this fertilizer in and
we let this go for one to two weeks and
then it makes us really black oily goo
which then we mix with water and we use
that for our fertilizer and then we also
make our own compost and then up until
last year we'd actually been going
around to the coffee shops and throwing
in the coffee and and tea but it got to
be an awful lot of work and so now our
compost is just made from on-site but
- really and so a combination of compost
and this compost tea is how we get our
fertility so nothing goes to waste right
that's right everything is in a cycle
everything is recycled here on our
garden it still takes some work but I
believe that it does take less work and
the lawn needs to be mowed at least once
a week and trimmed once a week or it
starts to look shabby but you can let a
permaculture go for a month
and it just gets taller and taller and
still looks pretty good and then when
you go in you do something called lop
and drop oftentimes you just cut stuff
and let it fall in place and then it
will rot and that adds to the fertility
I think permaculture overall is a little
bit less labor-intensive but it produces
in my opinion something that looks more
interesting and it's producing food
where a lawn produces no food
by Larry you can see how the garden
members just come and go